# Monday, October 7, 2024

## Scripts or Modules? It’s an Architecture Decision, Moreso Than a Data Decision

Have you ever found yourself struggling to decide what data goes where, whether some logic might be better suited to live in a script versus a module, which scripts should be responsible for managing which modules, or some other organizational problem that inevitably results in major refactors, stunted progress, and drained motivation? It's a common problem, not only in Defold, but in seemingly every language or framework. In this entry, I'll try to explain how I solved this recurring problem, such that it's no longer a recurring problem.

The sole purpose of a script is to provide channels of communication between the engine and the user through lifecycle functions. There are seven of these in total:

```lua
function init(self)
function final(self)
function update(self, dt)
function fixed_update(self, dt)
function on_message(self, message_id, message, sender)
function on_input(self, action_id, action)
function on_reload(self)
```

The engine calls these functions once or multiple times per frame. These are the only occasions in which the engine ever touches our data on its own volition. Keeping this in mind, I'll reiterate that the sole purpose of a script is to provide channels of communication between the engine and the user through lifecycle functions.

Lua works with modules. They're often called "Lua modules" and have the .lua file extension. Defold's script component is not your typical module. It's a sort of abstraction, specifically designed to be attached to a game object and, once again, provide channels of communication between the engine and the user through lifecycle functions. Scripts are not meant to be imported into other scripts or modules. In fact, Defold doesn't even allow this and throws an error in protest if we try to do it:

```
The file '/scripts/my_script.lua' could not be found.
```

I often see Defold users trying to write a lot of functionality and store a lot of local variables in whichever script file seems like the closest fit for that data. As I've tried to explain, that's not the purpose of a script. Given enough complexity and project growth, this design decision will cause an organizational mess and result in all of those major refactors and headaches I mentioned at the beginning of this entry.

Let's think about the problem of where to put things, but outside the context of Defold. In an ordinary program, how would this be handled. I'd expect there to be some number of modules that contain related functions and variables. These modules would include each other as dependencies wherever necessary. Finally, we would launch a driver program or REPL as the main program entry point. This driver would simply interface with the various modules, and perhaps manage a very small subset of data that's only relevant to the driver.

Now let's bring Defold back into the conversation. What changes? The driver changes. In fact, we can delete our old driver program entirely, because the engine *is* the driver. Just as the driver would simply interface with the various modules, so does Defold. It does this through those seven lifecycle functions in our scripts.

The problem arises when we realize that we no longer have just one driver program. Every script is a driver. If we spawned 100 game objects, each with its own script, then we  effectively launched 100 driver programs, each with completely unrelated goals. These drivers aren't meant to communicate with each other. As I explained earlier, their role is to simply interface with modules. All of the communication and data sharing is to be done between modules, not drivers. Modules can freely include each other as dependencies, drivers can not. Sound familiar? This is exactly how Defold treats scripts. They can't include each other as dependencies, making it difficult or impossible to share functions and variables between them.

"But wait!" I hear you say, "Scripts *can* communicate with each other. Defold's messaging system was built specifically for that! And don't forget about game object properties!" Worry not, I haven't forgotten about those features. The truth is that it's another grave mistake to think of messages and properties as ways to share data.

Properties are limited. They only allow for certain data types. They also need to be declared at compile time. They also require a middleman to work with, that being the `go` API, along with whatever limitations it presents. Under the hood, properties aren't meant to be thought of as ordinary Lua data. They actually live in the engine as `malloc`'d C code when the project is built, which explains why they're required to be declared at compile time.

Properties use the game object API for a reason: they're meant to be thought of as *properties of a game object*, kind of like a game object's genetic traits, not as arbitrary data that should be freely passed around. Recall that properties can be created with `go.property()`, however there are plenty of built-in properties too, such as position, scale, rotation, euler, color, shadow, size, slice9, outline, leading, fill angle, inner radius, tracking, etc. Properties can also be attached to shaders as uniforms, the most familiar built-in example probably being tint.

Messages are also limited for some of the same reasons. Not only that, but they're unsuspectingly dangerous to pass around without fully understanding your game loop. This might come across as overly dramatic, but let me explain.

When a message is posted with `msg.post()`, it doesn't arrive in sequence with the surrounding code. Instead, messages are processed at the end of each frame, after all scripts have completed their `update()` functions. This implies that although you may intend for another script to take some action or change its state "basically immediately", there's potentially still a whole lot of code to execute before that happens. When the message is finally processed, the state of the game may have changed such that whatever action that message was meant to take isn't valid anymore. A more concrete example is sending a message to another script, but the game object that script is attached to is deleted during the `update()` of some other script, causing one of the most difficult-to-debug errors Defold has to offer:

```
ERROR:GAMEOBJECT: Instance '/my_object#script' could not be found when dispatching message 'my_message' sent from collection:/my_other_object#script
```

This is an example of what I like to call a *frame-sensitive message error*. The order in which the engine calls `update()` on each script isn't known either, so an error like this one might only pop up every 100th launch.

It should be obvious why messages aren't a fantasic way of sharing data. As we just discussed, the data doesn't arrive immediately. An entire frame's worth of logic and state changes are made before the message arrives. Instead, messages should be used when you're certain that they'll end up at a valid location, and you're okay with a delayed delivery. Rather than thinking of messages as a way to share data, think of them moreso as a way to invoke functions that might not be accessible to every driver. One great example of this is instructing the render script to perform some action, since regular scripts can't interact with that side of things. Similarly, communicating between the GO and GUI worlds is also a good reason to use messages, since the same problem exists there.

Finally, we get to talk about modules! Recall our discussion about writing a Lua application without Defold. We have a driver that's focused on one goal, that interfaces with various modules, which communicate between each other. The driver also bears the responsibility of initializing and finalizing any data that needs initializing or finalizing within the modules, since module code can't run without a driver. When Defold is brought back into the conversation, we consider each script to be a driver, while modules are still just modules.

As long as we conform to the paradigm of each module declaring itself as a table, inserting its interface and variables into that table, then returning that table at the end of the file, we're able to import any number of modules into any number of scripts without concern. There's no delay, no frame-sensitive message delay, no restrictions on what data types are supported, etc. The only obvious issue is the aforementioned separation between the render script, GUI scripts, and GO scripts. Modules can contain code for all three of these, but we have to be careful to not mix them in a single function.

```lua
-- my_module.lua

-- The module table, also the interface that other modules and the driver import.
local my_module = {}

-- Import as many dependencies as you like.
local dependency_module = require "dependency_module"

-- Private data.
local private_variable = ...
local function private_function() ... end

-- Public data, also the interface that other modules and the driver import.
my_module.public_variable = ...
function my_module.public_function() ... end

-- Allow other modules and the driver to import this module as a dependency.
return my_module
```

What if we want a private function in a module to be triggered as a callback? For example, we may not want to make a certain function public, since it wouldn't make sense for any other module to call it directly. If we were working with scripts, we would have to resort to posting a message. But since we're working with modules, we can design a no-delay callback system, which is itself another module.

```lua
-- bus.lua

local m_bus = {}

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- Local Variables
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- All possible message types that can be triggered.
-- These are of course dependent on the context of your game.
local g_type_volatile_input = hash("volatile_input")
local g_type_weather_rain = hash("weather_rain")
local g_type_weather_clear = hash("weather_clear")
local g_type_update_sun = hash("update_sun")

-- Each message type lives in this table and maps to an array of callbacks,
-- which are filled by other modules through the `m_bus.subscribe()` function.
local g_callbacks =
{
	[g_type_volatile_input] = {},
	[g_type_weather_rain] = {},
	[g_type_weather_clear] = {},
	[g_type_update_sun] = {}
}

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- Module Variables
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- Other modules pass these public message types to the `m_bus.subscribe()`,
-- `m_bus.unsubscribe()`, and `m_bus.trigger()` functions.
m_bus.g_type_volatile_input = g_type_volatile_input
m_bus.g_type_weather_rain = g_type_weather_rain
m_bus.g_type_weather_clear = g_type_weather_clear
m_bus.g_type_update_sun = g_type_update_sun

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- Module Functions
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- Other modules can subscribe to whichever message types they require.
function m_bus.subscribe(type, callback)
	g_callbacks[type][callback] = true
end

-- Allow other modules to unsubscribe too.
function m_bus.unsubscribe(type, callback)
	g_callbacks[type][callback] = nil
end

-- When a module wants to trigger a certain event, it passes the corresponding
-- message type to this function, which then triggers all of the callbacks that
-- were saved by `m_bus.subscribe()`.
-- This is one way in which a module can call private functions that live in another module.
function m_bus.trigger(type, data)
	for callback, _ in pairs(g_callbacks[type]) do
		callback(data)
	end
end

return m_bus
```

This bus module is nearly identical to what I use in my own projects. Feel free to read through the code and comments. It's a very simple yet powerful approach to keeping functions private, but still allowing them to be triggered as callbacks by other modules. As a point of clarification, I use the `m_` prefix to refer to a module table, and the `_g` prefix to refer to variables or functions that are not nested within another structure. This helps me avoid name collisions. For example, imagine importing modules called camera and timer. They would shadow Defold's global camera and timer APIs, forcing us to use undesirable alternative identifiers for those modules. Same idea goes for non-nested data.

That's everything I wanted to share about my mental model and approach to answering the question of when to use scripts versus modules. Scripts are drivers. Their sole purpose is to provide channels of communication between the engine and the user through lifecycle functions. Keep them lightweight. Use them to initialize and finalize modules, and to interface with modules at a high level. Modules should be separated by relevance. They can communicate between each other freely, including triggering functionality and sharing data. Think twice before declaring properties and passing messages. Properties are kind of like a game object's genetic traits. Messages are useful for triggering functionality that isn't more easily covered by modules, such as communicating between the render script, GUI scripts, and GO scripts. Rmemeber to be wary of frame-sensitive message errors. If you run into the occasional seemingly-random error, it probably stems from a message being processed after an unexpected state change during the previous update cycle.

Thanks for reading.

> I'm always happy to answer questions or chat about anything posted here. If you'd like to comment on a journal entry, please use GitHub's [Discussions](https://github.com/VowSoftware/journal/discussions) feature. Remember to link to the relevant entry somewhere in your post.
>
> Please click the ☆ button on GitHub if this repository is useful. Thank you!